As soon as the idea of the Flood had subsided,
A hare stopped among the clover and the moving flower-bells and
said its prayer to the rainbow through the spider’s web.
Oh! the precious stones hiding––the flowers looking round
already.
In the dirty main street the stalls were set up, and the boats were
dragged towards the sea moving up in shelves, as in old prints.
At Bluebeard’s, blood flowed––in abattoirs––in circuses, where
the seal of God blanched the windows. Blood and milk flowed.
Beavers built. In bars and cafés, fierce coffees steamed.
In the great house of window-panes still running with water, the
children in mourning looked at the marvellous pictures.
A door slammed shut, and, on the village square, the child whirled
his arms, recognized by weathervanes and steeplecocks everywhere,
under the brilliant sudden shower.
Madame *** installed a piano in the Alps. Mass and first communions
were celebrated at the cathedral’s hundred thousand altars.
The caravans departed. And the Hotel Splendide was built in the
chaos of ice and polar night.
From then on, the Moon heard jackals howling across the deserts
of thyme––and eclogues in their wooden shoes grumbling in the
orchard. Then, in the violet, budding grove, Eucharis* told me it was
Spring.
Surge up, pond,––Foam, roll across the bridge, over the woods;––
black drapes and organs;––lightnings, thunder;––rise and roll;––
Waters and sorrows, rise and heighten the Floods.
For since they have dispersed,––oh, the precious stones burying
themselves, and the opened flowers!––all excitement has gone! and
the Queen, the Witch who lights her charcoal fire in the earthen pot,
will never deign to tell us what she knows, and we do not.

This idol, dark eyes, yellow mane, no family or court, nobler than
fables, Mexican and Flemish: his domain, insolent azure and green,
runs over beaches bearing fierce Greek and Slav and Celtic names,
given them by waves with no ships.
At the forest edge––dream flowers tinkle, splinter, flare––the
orange-lip girl, knees crossed in the clear flood welling from the
meadows, nakedness shaded, traversed and costumed by the rainbows,
flora, sea.
Ladies promenading on terraces next to the sea; little girls and
giantesses, superb black women in grey-green moss, jewels tall on
the rich soil of the unfrozen little gardens and groves––young
mothers, big sisters, their eyes deep with pilgrimage, Sultans’ wives,
princesses of tyrannical demeanour and dress, little foreign girls,
people full of soft unhappiness.
Wearisome, the hour of feeling and fondnesses.
That’s her, the little dead girl, behind the rose-bushes.––The
deceased young mamma descends the flight of steps.––The cousin’s
carriage grates along the sand––the little brother (away in the
Indies!) there, against the sunset, in the meadow of pinks––the old
people, buried upright in the wallflower rampart.
The swarm of golden leaves rings the general’s residence. They
are in the South––You take the red road to find the deserted inn.
The chateau is up for sale; shutters hanging off––The priest no
doubt has removed the key to the church––Around the estate, the
wardens’ lodges are unoccupied. The fences are so high you see
only the bustling tree-tops. Anyway, there is nothing to see in
there.
The meadows reach up to hamlets where no cockerels are, no
anvils. The sluice-gate is raised. Oh, the Calvaries, and the mills of
emptiness, the islands, the haystacks.
Magic flowers were humming. The slopes cradled him. Fabulously elegant beasts moved about. The clouds were gathering over the
high sea, an eternity of warm tears.
In the wood, there is a bird, its song makes you stop and blush.
There is a clock which never strikes.
There is a hollow in the ground with a nest of white animals.
There is a cathedral which goes down and a lake which rises.
There is a little vehicle abandoned in the copse, or running down
the lane, covered in ribbons.
There is a troupe of little costumed actors, glimpsed on the road
through the limits of the wood.
And finally, when you are hungry or thirsty, there is someone who
chases you off.
I am the saint, at prayer on the terrace,––as the gentle beasts graze
their way down to the Sea of Palestine.
I am the scholar in the dark armchair. The rain and branches
crash against the windows of the library.
I am the one who walks the high road through the stunted woods;
the noise of the sluice-gates drowns out my footsteps. For a good
while, I can see the melancholy golden wash of sunset.
I might well be the child abandoned on the jetty heading out to sea,
the little farmboy following the lane which rises up to touch the sky.
The paths are rough. The knolls are covered with broom. The air
is still. How the birds and springs are far away! It can only be the end
of the world, if you go on.
Let me rent this tomb in the end, whitewashed, cement-lines in
relief––deep underground.
I lean my elbows on the table, the lamp casts fierce light on these
newspapers I am stupid enough to reread, these books empty of
interest.
A huge distance above my subterranean sitting-room, houses
plant themselves down, mists assemble. The mud is red or black.
Monstrous city, night without end!
Not quite so high are drains. All around, just the thickness of the
globe. Perhaps the azure gulfs, wells of fire. It is on these planes
perhaps that moons and comets meet, seas and fables.
In my bitter hours, I imagine balls of sapphire, metal. I am master
of the silence. Why should something which resembles a tunnel of
light gleam weakly at the corner of the arch?
A Prince was vexed that he had only ever spent his time perfecting
acts of banal generosity. He envisaged astounding revolutions in love,
and suspected his wives of being able to do better than their usual
accommodations enhanced by heaven and luxury. He wanted to see
the truth, the hour of essential desire and gratification. Whether or
not this was an aberration of piety, he wanted. At least he had
sufficient human power.
All the women he had known were done to death. What havoc
in the garden of beauty! As the blade fell, they blessed him. He
summoned no further women.––Women reappeared.
He killed everyone who followed him, after the hunt or after
drink.––Still the hordes, the golden rooftops, the fine beasts
continued to exist.
Is it possible to be delirious with destruction, to find youth again
in cruelty! There was not a murmur from the people. No one offered
to endorse his views.
One evening he was galloping along proudly. A Genie appeared,
of ineffable beauty, too much even to admit. From his look, his
bearing, there emerged the promise of a multiple and complex love!
of happiness beyond words, unbearable even! The Prince and the
Genie probably blotted themselves out in essential health. How
could they not have died of it? So, together they died.
But this Prince passed away in his palace at a normal age. The
Prince was the Genie. The Genie was the Prince.
Our desire lacks knowing music.
Weird-looking, sturdy types. Many of them have exploited your
worlds. Wanting for nothing, and in no haste to bring into play their
brilliant abilities and their knowledge of how you think. What
mature men! Eyes bewildered like summer night, red and black,
three-coloured, steel pricked out with golden stars; deformed features,
like lead, blanched, on fire; caprices of hoarseness! The cruel
swagger of flashy rags––There are some young people––what would
they make of Cherubino?*––endowed with frightening voices and
dangerous resources. They are sent into town to parade themselves,
got up in disgusting luxury.
O most violent Paradise of the furious grimace! No comparison
with your Fakirs and the other buffooneries of the stage. In costumes
as if in an improvised bad dream, they act out sad stories, tragedies
of brigands and demigods more spirited than history or religion
ever were. Chinese, Hottentots, gypsies, dimwits, hyenas, Molochs,
antique lunacies, sinister demons, they mix popular turns, stories
heard at mother’s knee, with bestial poses and blandishments. They
would happily do new plays, sentimental songs. Master-jugglers that
they are, they transform place and person, using hypnotic makebelieve.
Eyes flame, blood sings, bones expand, tears run, and strands
of red. Their jeers, their terror last a few seconds, or months and
months.
I alone have the key to this wild parade.
Graceful son of Pan! Around your head crowned with little flowers
and berries your eyes, precious spheres, move. Stained with brown
dregs, your cheeks grow hollow. Your fangs gleam. Your chest is like
a cithara, a trickle of notes runs round your blond arms. Your heart
beats in that belly where the double sex lies still. Walk, at night,
gently moving that thigh, that second thigh, and that left leg.
Against snow a tall Being of Beauty. Hisses of death and circles of
muted music make this worshipped body rise, expand, and tremble
like a ghost; black and scarlet wounds burst in superb flesh. The
colours, clearly those of life, grow dark, dance, stand out against the
Vision taking shape. And the shudders rise and rumble, and the
frenzied flavour of these effects as they accept deadly hisses and
raucous music which the world, far behind us, hurls at our mother of
beauty––she moves back, makes herself tall. Oh! our bones now wear
a new and loving body.
O the ashen face, the horsehair escutcheon, the crystal arms! The
cannon on which I must fall through the fray of trees and buoyant
air!
O the enormous avenues of the holy land, the temple terraces! What
has become of the Brahmin who explained to me the Proverbs? Of
that time, that place, I still see even the old women! I remember
hours of silver and sun towards the river, the landscape’s hand on my
shoulder and our caresses as we stood on the spiced plains.––A flight
of scarlet pigeons clamours round my thoughts.––Exiled here, once I
had a stage on which to perform the great dramatic works of all
literatures. I would show you unbelievable riches. I observe the history
of the treasures which once you found. I can see what will
follow! My wisdom is as despised as chaos. What is my nothingness
compared to the stupor which awaits you?

I am an inventor with quite different virtues from all those who have
gone before me, a musician in fact, who has found something like the
keynote of love. At present, a country gentleman in a harsh stretch of
land under sober sky, I try to be moved by the memory of a beggar
childhood, of apprenticeship or arrival in clogs, of polemics, of my
five or six widowhoods, and of a few orgies of alcohol, when a strong
head stopped me reaching the same fever-pitch as my drinkingcompanions.
I do not regret my erstwhile share of divine gaiety: the
sober air of that harsh landscape feeds most actively my atrocious
scepticism. But, as this scepticism cannot be put to use any longer,
and as anyway I am engrossed in a new uneasiness,––I expect to go
mad in a particularly vicious way.
In an attic where I was locked up when I was twelve, I came to know
the world, I illustrated the human comedy. In a store-cupboard, I
learnt history. At some night-time festival in a city of the North, I
met all the women of the old painters. In an ancient Paris passageway,
I was taught the classical sciences. In a magnificent dwelling
ringed round by the whole Orient, I finished my huge work and
spent my illustrious retirement. I brewed my blood. I have been
exempted from my duty. No need to think of it any more even. I am
truly from beyond the grave, and completely unbeholden.
Enough seen. The vision has been met in every air.
Enough had. Distant sounds of cities, in the evening, and in the
sun, and always.
Enough known. Life’s injunctions. O Sounds and Visions!
Departure in new affection and new noise.
One beautiful morning, in a country of very gentle people, a magnificent
man and woman were shouting in the public square: ‘My
friends, I want her to be queen!’ ‘I want to be queen!’ She was laughing
and trembling. He was telling their friends about a revelation, an
ordeal completed. They were swooning one against the other.
And indeed, monarchs they were, for a whole morning during
which crimson hangings were raised up the house façades, and for
the entire afternoon of their progress towards the gardens of palms.
One touch of your finger on the drum sets off every sound and starts
the new harmony.
You take one step, new men rise and start to march.
Your head turns away: new love! Your head turns back,––new
love!
‘Change our lot, wipe out plagues, starting with time’, these
children chant at you. ‘Cherish and nurture the substance of our
fortunes and our desires where you please’, they beg.
You who have arrived from all time, and will leave for everywhere.
Oh my Good, my Beauty! Atrocious fanfare in which I do not waver!
magical torture-rack! Salute the unheard-of work and the marvellous
body, for the first time! It began amid the laughter of the children, it
will finish with them. This poison will stay in all our veins even
when the fanfare changes and brings us back to the old disharmony.
O now, let us who so deserve these tortures fervently gather that
superhuman promise made to our created bodies; that promise, that
madness! Elegance, knowledge, violence! We have the promise that
the tree of good and evil shall be buried in darkness, that tyrannical decencies shall be exiled, so that we may introduce our love of
utmost purity. It began in some disgust and it finished––unable as
we are to seize this eternity here and now––it finished in a riot of
scents.
Laughter of the children, discretion of the slaves, the virgins’
austerity, the horror of the faces and objects which belong here, may
you be hallowed by the memory of this wake. It began in utter
boorishness, here it is ending in angels of fire and ice.
Small drunken wake, holy! if only for the mask you have bestowed
on us. Method, we confirm you! We do not forget that yesterday you
glorified each of our ages. We have faith in the poison. We know how
to give our life whole, every day.
This is the time of the assassins.

When the world has been reduced to a single dark wood for our four
astonished eyes,––to a beach for two faithful children,––to a house
of music for our manifest sympathy,––I shall find you.
Let there remain here below just a single old man, calm and
beautiful, surrounded by ‘untold riches’,––and I shall be at your feet.
Let me have accomplished all your memories,––let me be the
woman who knows how to bind you hand and foot,––I shall suffocate
you.
When we are very strong,––who pulls back? when we sparkle so, who
falls down in ridicule? When we are full of malice, what would they
do to us?
Put on finery, dance, laugh,––I shall never be able to send Love
out of the window.
My companion, beggar-girl, monster child! how these unfortunate
women and these manoeuvres and my difficulties leave you
unmoved. Attach yourself to us with your impossible voice, your
voice! the one emollient for this vile despair.
An overcast morning in July. A taste of ashes wafts through the
air;––the smell of smoke seeping in the hearth,––well-soaked
flowers,––the wrecked walks,––the drizzle of canals across the
fields––indeed, why not toys and incense now?
I have hung ropes from belfry to belfry; garlands from window to
window; golden chains from star to star, and I dance.
The pond, high up, does not stop steamimg. What witch will set
herself up against the white sunset? What violet foliage will fall?
While public funds are being squandered on festivals of brotherhood,
a bell of rose-coloured fire tolls in the clouds.
Sharpening a pleasant flavour of India ink, a mist of black powder
falls gently on my vigil,––I lower the gas-mantle, I throw myself on
the bed, and, turned towards the shadow, I see you, my girls! my
queens!
O that warm February morning! The inopportune South wind came
to rekindle the memories of our absurdly penniless condition, our
juvenile destitution.
Henrika was wearing a brown-and-white check cotton shirt, the
sort of thing which must have been in fashion last century, a bonnet
with ribbons, and a silk scarf. It was sadder than a funeral. We were
strolling round the outskirts of the city. The sky was overcast, and
the South wind conjured all the ugly smells of the ravaged gardens
and dried-up fields.

It cannot have wearied my wife as much as it did me. In a little
pool left behind by last month’s floods on a path quite high up, she
pointed out to me some tiny fish.
The city, with its smoke and the bustle of its workplaces, followed
us far along our path. O the other world, the abode blessed by the
sky and the shade of trees! The South wind brought back to me
the wretched incidents of childhood, my summer despairs, the
horrifying quantity of strength and knowledge from which fate
has always kept me at arm’s length. No! we shall not spend the
summer in this mean land where we can never be anything but
betrothed orphans. I want this hardened arm no more to drag a
cherished image.
Grey crystal skies. A bizarre pattern of bridges, some straight, some
curved, yet others sloping down or angled in obliquely at the first,
and these figures repeated in the other lit-up stretches of canal, but
all so long and light that the banks, heavy with domes, sink and grow
smaller. Some of these bridges are still crowded with hovels. Others
sprout masts, signals, frail parapets. Minor chords meet and melt;
strands of rope rise from the banks. A red coat can be discerned,
other costumes too, perhaps, and musical instruments. Are these
well-known airs, snatches of lordly concerts, remnants of public
anthems? The water is grey and blue, wide as an arm of the sea.––A
ray of white light, falling from high up in the sky, clears away this
charade.
I am an ephemeral and none-too-discontented citizen of a metropolis
thought to be modern because all established taste has been
avoided in the furnishings and on the outsides of houses as well as in
the city plan. Here you will find no trace of any monument to superstition.
So, morals and language finally have been reduced to their
simplest expression! These myriad people who have no need to know
one another carry on in such similar ways their education, their work and their old age that their life-span must be many times shorter
than certain wild statistics show about the people of the continent.
And so I see from my window new spectres rolling through the
thick, eternal coal-smoke––our woodland shade, our summer
night!––new Erinyes,* in front of the cottage which is my country
and all my heart as everything here looks like this,––dry-eyed Death,
our busy daughter and servant, a desperate Love and a nice Crime
whimpering in the muck of the street.
To the right the summer dawn wakes the leaves and mists and
sounds of this corner of the park, and the slopes to the left keep in
their violet shadow the thousand rapid ruts on the moistened road.
Parade of enchantments. And yes: carts laden with animals of golden
wood, poles and multicoloured canvas, the galloping stride of
twenty dappled circus horses, and the children and men on their
most extraordinary mounts;––twenty vehicles, sculpted, hung with
flags and decorated with flowers like the coaches of old or out of fairy
tales, full of children got up for suburban pastorals;––Even coffins
under their canopy of night flourishing ebony plumes, passing by to
the trot of the great tall blue-black mares.
The official acropolis surpasses the most colossal conceptions of
modern barbarity. Impossible to describe the flat light produced by
the grey unchanging sky, the imperial glare of the buildings, and the
eternal snow on the ground. With singularly outrageous taste, all the
marvels of classical architecture have been reproduced. I visit exhibitions
of painting in places twenty times the size of Hampton
Court.* What painting! A Norwegian Nebuchadnezzar has had
made the staircases of the ministries; the underlings I managed to see
are prouder than Brahmins* as it is, and the look of the men guarding
the colossi and of the building officials made me tremble. The
grouping of buildings into squares, enclosed courtyards, and terraces, has displaced the cabmen. The parks exemplify primitive nature
shaped with marvellous art. The better district of the town has
inexplicable details: an arm of the sea, empty of boats, unfolds its
gauze sheet of blue hail between quays stacked with giant candelabra.
A short bridge leads to a postern right underneath the dome of
the Sainte-Chapelle.* This dome is an armature of artistically
worked steel some fifteen thousand feet in diameter.
At certain points on the copper footbridges, the platforms, the
stairs which run round the covered markets and the pillars, I
thought I could judge the depth of the city! This is the prodigy I
was not able to pin down: how far below or above the acropolis are
the other districts? For the stranger of our time reconnaissance is
impossible. The commercial district is a circus done in a single
style, with arched galleries. No shops to be seen. But the snow on
the streets has been trampled; a handful of nabobs, as rare as a
Sunday-morning stroller in London, make their way towards a carriage
of diamonds. A few divans of red velvet: polar drinks are
served, whose prices go from eight hundred to eight thousand
rupees. I consider searching out some theatres in this circus, but tell
myself that the shops themselves must house some decidedly murky
dramas. I think there exists a police force; but the laws must be
so strange that I give up trying to imagine what the city’s shady
characters are like.
Away from the centre, it is as elegant as a fine Parisian street, and
graced by an air of light. The democratic element numbers about
one hundred souls. Here again, the houses are not arranged in rows;
the last part of the city dissolves strangely into the countryside, the
‘County’ which fills the unending west with the forests and colossal
plantations where savage gentlefolk hunt down its newspaper
columns by man-made light.
Pitiful brother! What atrocious nights of wakefulness I owed him! ‘I
was not mad to embark on this venture. I scoffed at his infirmity. If
we went back into exile, into slavery, it would be my fault.’ He
attributed to me the strangest ill-luck and innocence, and added
worrying explanations.
I replied by sneering at this satanic man of learning, and ended up
moving to the window. I created, beyond the tract of land traversed
by ribbons of distant music, the phantoms of the luxury to come, by
night.
After this vaguely hygienic diversion, I stretched out on a straw
mattress. And, almost every night, as soon as sleep had come, the
poor brother got up, his mouth stinking, his eyes mere sockets,––just
as he saw himself in his dreams!––and dragged me into the room,
howling his dream of idiot pain.
Indeed, in all sincerity of mind, I had made the commitment to
restore him to his original state as a child of the sun,––so we wandered,
nourished on the wine of caverns and the traveller’s crust,
with me hurrying to find the place and the key.
These are cities! This is a people for whom these dream Alleghenies*
and these Lebanons* have risen into being! Chalets of glass and wood
which move on invisible rails and pulleys. The ancient craters ringed
round by colossi and copper palms roar mellifluously in the flames.
Festivals of love echo over the canals suspended behind the chalets.
The chase of chiming bells reverberates around the gorges. Guilds of
giant singers hurry in, draped in robes and oriflammes as brilliant as
the light from mountain-tops. On the platforms deep in the gulfs the
Rolands* trumpet their defiance. On the footbridges of the abyss and
the roofs of the inns the heat of the heavens unfurls flags on the
poles. The collapse of apotheoses spreads to the highest fields where
seraphic centauresses move among the avalanches. Above the level of
the tallest summits, a sea agitated by the endless birth of Venus,
shouldering choral fleets, singing with precious pearls and
conches,––sea sometimes darkening with deadly shards of light.
From the slopes comes the bellow of harvested flowers as big as our
weapons and goblets. Processions of Mabs* in opaline and russet
robes climb out of the ravines. Up there, feet in the waterfall and the
brambles, Diana* suckles the deer. The Bacchantes* of the suburbs sob
and the moon burns and howls. Venus enters the blacksmiths’ and
the hermits’ caves. Clusters of bell-towers sing out the ideas of the nations. From castles of bone unknown music comes. Every legend
circulates and waves of impulse pour into the settlements. The paradise
of storms is breaking up. The savages celebrate the night in
endless dance. And in an hour I have come down into the life of a
Baghdad boulevard where gathered people have sung the joy of the
new work, in a heavy breeze, moving about, unable to avoid the
fabulous phantoms of the mountains which must have been their
meeting place.
What kind arms, what auspicious hour will restore to me this
region from which come my sleeping and my merest movements?
From the indigo straits to Ossian’s* seas, on the orange-pink sand
which the wine-sky has washed, crystal boulevards have just risen
and met, settled straightaway by poor young families who get their
food from the fruiterer’s. No riches here.––The city!
From the bitumen desert flee, in headlong disarray with sheets of
fog spread out in ghastly layers in the curving, receding, falling sky,
formed by the most sinister black smoke which the grieving Ocean
can produce, the helmets, the wheels, the boats, the rumps. Battle!
Raise your eyes: the wooden bridge, arched; the last vegetable
gardens of Samaria;* those masks lit up the lantern lashed by the cold
night; the mindless water-nymph in the noisy dress, deep in the
river; the luminous skulls in the rows of peas––and the other
phantasmagoria––the countryside.
Roads lined with railings and walls, able hardly to contain their
clumps of trees, and the atrocious flowers which might be called
hearts and sisters, Damascus damning with tiresomeness,––the
property of fairy-tale aristocracies from beyond the Rhine, Japanese,
Guaranis,* still fit to receive the music of the old traditions––and
there are inns which have already closed their doors, and which will
not reopen––there are princesses, and if you are not too overwhelmed,
the study of the stars––the sky.
The morning when, with Her, you fought together in the sparkle
of snow, the green lips, the ice, the black flags and the blue rays, and
the purple perfume of the polar sun,––your strength.
For Helen the ornamental saps conspired in the virgin shades and
the impassive brightness in the silence of stars. The summer heat
was entrusted to mute birds and the required indolence to a funeral
barge beyond price in among bays of dead loves and faded perfumes.
––After the time of the woodcutter women’s tunes sung to the
sound of the torrent beneath the ruin of the wood, of the bells of the
cattle in the valley’s echo, and of the cries from the steppes.––
For Helen’s childhood the furs and shadows shivered,––and the
breast of the poor, and the legends of the sky.
And her eyes and her dancing still superior to the precious bursts
of light, to the effects of the cold, to the pleasure of the unique scene
and moment.
Calculations set to one side, the inevitable descent from the sky, the
visit paid by memories and the seance of rhythms take over the
house, the head and the world of the mind.
––A horse charges off on the suburban race-course, away through
the fields and woodlands, riddled with carbonic plague. A sorry
woman out of some drama, somewhere in the world, sighs for
improbable surrenders to love. The desperadoes long for storms,
drunkenness, and wounds. Little children, along river-banks, utter
curses under their breath.––
Back to our studies, to the noise of the consuming work which
gathers and swells again among the masses.
As a child, certain skies sharpened the way I saw: every character
very subtly changed my features. Phenomena were moved.––Now,
the unending inflection of moments and the infinity of mathematics
send me scurrying through this world where I endure every civil
success, respected by strange childhood and by vast affection.––I
dream of a War, of justice or of might, of logic quite unforeseen.
It is as simple as a musical phrase.
Golden dawn and trembling dusk find our brig lying off the coast
opposite that villa and its outbuildings, a promontory as long as
Epirus and the Peloponnese or the great island of Japan, or Arabia!
Shrines lit up by returning processions; huge views of modern
coastal defences; dunes coloured by incandescent flowers and bacchanals;
great Carthaginian canals, Embankments of a shifty Venice;
feeble eruptions of Etnas; crevasses of flowers and glacier water;
wash-houses ringed with German poplars; slopes of strange parks
where Trees of Japan hang their heads; the curving frontage of
Royals and Grands in Scarborough* and Brooklyn; their railways run
beside and under and over the planes and surfaces of this Hotel,
chosen from the history of the most elegant, most colossal buildings
of Italy, America, Asia; its windows and terraces, bathed now in
precious lights, drinks, sweet air, are open to the spirit of the travellers
and the nobility––and they permit, in daylight hours, every
tarantella of the coasts, and even the ritornelli of art’s illustrious
valleys, to cover in splendour the façades of the Palace. Promontory.
The ancient Comedy follows its conventions and shares out its idylls;
Boulevards of stage-planks.
A long wooden pier from one end to the other of a rock-strewn
field where the crowd of barbarians moves about beneath the bare
trees.
In corridors of black gauze following the footsteps of the walkers,
with their lanterns and leaves.
Birds from mystery plays alight on a stone pontoon moved by the
archipelago teeming with boatloads of spectators.
Lyrical scenes, to the accompaniment of flute and drum, slope
down into recesses worked in under the ceilings, round the meetingrooms
of modern clubs or the great rooms of the ancient East.
The magic event plays at the top of an ampitheatre crowned with
thickets,––Or gets busy and alters itself to suit the Boeotians,* in the
shadow of the waving clumps of trees at the top of the cultivated
land.
The comic opera is divided on a stage at the angle where ten
partitions intersect, built from the gallery down to the footlights.
Reality being too thorny for my my great character,––I found myself
nevertheless at my lady’s, in the guise of a big blue-grey bird soaring
towards the mouldings on the ceiling and dragging my wings among
the shadows of the evening.
I was, at the foot of the canopy supporting her adored jewels and
her physical masterpieces, a huge bear with violet gums and fur,
shagreened by suffering, my eyes on the crystal and the silver on the
console-tables.
All became dark and burning aquarium. In the morning,––a quarrelsome
June dawn,––I ran into the fields, an ass, trumpeting and
brandishing my grievance, until the Sabine women* from the suburbs
arrived and threw themselves on my breast.

